
[//]: # (./two_preface.md)

[//]: # (This is _two_ underscore preface because it should come after the diagrams.)

[//]: # (Maybe start with this: You can skip this preface. Go ahead, I don't mind. I'd much prefer you dove directly into the story than have you slog through this thing out of a sense of duty or completion. However for those of you inclined to wring the most you possibly can out of a book, I've got this preface in here to maybe shed some light on a few of the more obscure themes of this book. So if you're still reading and inclined to finish the preface, perhaps you'll have a ever so slightly fuller experience when you hit the book itself.)

# Preface to the Beta Version

This first 500 words isn't the preface. It's the preface to the Preface to The Pre-release Draft.

But This book is going to need a preface. 

The problem is it does not comfortably fit into one of the categories most books are jammed into. It is about submarines, but it is not about _war_ submarines. It is not _The Hunt For Red October_. If what you want from your submarine story is a "taut political thriller," you'll have to find it elsewhere. (Though you should still read this book!)

The main submarines in this book (the ones in the diagrams) are cargo submarines. This means the book probably has more in common with 1970s trucker movies than 1990s submarine movies --- though with more women in positions of leadership than either of those genres. "Submarine truckers" is not a category that exists on Amazon (yet).

It is unquestionably speculative fiction. But it is not science fiction. (Science, such as it is in the story, is purely science-fact.) It is not an alternative history --- at least not in the way that term is usually defined (that is, Hitler has not won the war in this book). It's also not steam punk. It might have submarines, but there's no steam. Maybe more importantly, the alternative-history world it is set in is about 100 years later than the alternative-history world steam punk stories are set in.

Besides, I think genres should be defined more by aesthetics than technology. This story is entirely driven by the world the characters live in. A world of filthy, noisy, all-encompassing, mechanical machines, on which their lives and their livelihoods both depend. The grit and dirt permeate through. Maybe the genre could be "grime punk," though that is not yet a real genre either.

With no genre that appropriately short-hands what the book might be about, the preface has to do a lot of work. It has to set up expectations for the story, without getting involved in the story itself. It is also the only place any intended meta-narratives (of which there are a few) can be made explicit. (I have nothing to say about _unintended_ meta-narratives.) The following preface is merely a draft of one possibility for how to introduce the book. There's a number of other directions that it could take. Read it, read the book, and then come back and check the preface again. Let me know if you think it is working.

Without any further delay, the draft Preface to The Pre-release Draft...

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Anyone who has ever had the pleasure of riding an old motorcycle has likely employed a device called the 'petcock.' The petcock was a valve that sat on the bottom of the fuel tank and when in its normal run position allowed fuel to flow through it to the engine via a small pipe that stuck up a bit into the fuel tank. As the rider rode and the fuel burned down, there was no way the fuel level could fall below the height of that small pipe. When the fuel reached that point, the motorcycle would cough, sputter, and for all intents of purposes be out of gas --- even though there was still a pool of fuel sloshing around in the tank below the mouth of the little pipe. The sputtering motor made it exceedingly clear to rider that they were running low on fuel. The rider would then flip the petcock over and the valve would turn to open a hole at the very bottom of the fuel tank and allow the sloshing remains of the fuel to run down to the engine. The rider had the reserve fuel left in the tank to let them ride long enough to find a place to refuel.

The petcock was a super-simple mechanical device premised on the idea that the surest way to know you are running out of gasoline is to actually run out of gas. Any idiot who could manage riding a motorcycle could also manage the basic premise behind it. And most idiots could take it apart and could see how it worked if they were so inclined. Today the same need --- to know when one is running low on fuel --- is met by a sophisticated sensor mounted in the tank, that feeds data to a black-box of a computer that calculates the remaining fuel and tells the rider when the fuel is running low by means of colored lights. The idiot riding the motorcycle needs to know less than ever about their bike to ride it. And the idiot is far less likely to be able to figure out how to fix it if something goes wrong.

[//]: # (Maybe the preface should be less/not about this first part of the 20th Century generation thing and more about motorcycles. You could talk about how motorcycles are on the verge of going almost entirely electric --- and I understand why given the performance metrics, quiet, and most of all simplicity. But what if the pure mechanical pleasure of riding a motorcycle gets lost? I always want to ask riders of electric motorcycles: don't you miss shifting? Don't you miss the oneness with the bike you have when you learn to use a clutch? Mechanical pleasure might be something far more deeply ingrained in mammals than we suspect --- mice who choose to run on the wheel in the woods for instance. The bicycle and the old submarines totally tapped into this magic. This book is an attempt to capture the pure mechanical pleasures like that in novel form, and use it to tell a good story.]


[//]: # (Maybe it's worth pointing out that the technology that drove old submarines is essentially the same that drives out newest hybrid cars. It's not the technology itself that is disappointing --- it will be hard to regret a shift away from fossil-fuel burning machines --- but the disassociation from mechanical things, and the rise of intelligent machines that don't require a human operator at the mechanical level.)

[//]: # (Or maybe you should use this space to tie it to how exciting staring at dials can be --- maybe even reference China Syndrome. Actually, that seems pretty strong --- use that as an argument for why mechanical-based stories are compelling?)

There was a generation that lived through a time up to, through, and a little beyond the great world wars. Like us, technology changed their world. They lived every day of their lives with complex new industrial technologies. But the technology of that time was different than ours. It was rooted in mechanical and electrical things. In their time, anyone who wanted to understand how a piece of amazing new technology worked could simply take it apart. Most things had an intuitive structure --- mechanical solutions based on logical processes. This is not the same as being _simple_. Many things from that era were in fact far more complex than today's equivalent devices. But learning how something worked --- and how to repair it --- only required a willingness to disassemble (and, following that, a whole lot of experience doing it). Most parts also had a macroscopic quality. They worked on a human scale. You could see the parts without magnification, you could place a part where it belonged with your fingers rather than any kind of special tool. If you take apart today's technology, all you will find is vanishingly small components that cannot be repaired, only replaced.

Because of its mechanical underpinnings, the technology of that first half of the 20th Century also just _behaved_ more rationally. Even those who had not the faintest grasp of the fundamentals of how mechanical technology worked, would learn how their machine would behave just through the experience of using it. When something unexpected happened, it meant something was going wrong, not that randomness in the system was manifesting itself. People could depend on their technology to behave intuitively when they used it. Unlike our modern digital-based technology, where even experts can be shocked by how it behaves and at a loss to explain why.

This old mechanical technology also came with an aesthetic. The mechanical nature of it made the stuff dirty, greasy, and grimy. It was powered by the air-fouling burning of things, kept lubricated by chemical greases, and cleaned with penetrating toxic solvents. This aesthetic permeated our culture. The rich found ways to constantly clean it. The poor and the technology maintainers simply lived in and among it. They were nothing but punks in the grime, though they never would have referred to themselves that way.

It has often been commented that many of the stories from the great wars were compelling because they could be placed atop clear moral ground. But less remarked upon is that many stories from the wars were so gripping because they told stories of average people achieving amazing things with the exciting new tools available to them. Often those average people made their extraordinary tools and technologies perform far beyond their original intended use. To this day there seems to be no end to the delight people take in stories from the electro-mechanical age of machines. Indeed, we may even be more engaged with electro-mechanical stories than with stories derived from our modern technology. Nearly everyone would rather follow the building of a custom motorcycle than the latest achievements from a microchip clean-room. 

The story told here is bracketed by technologies that anyone could understand with nothing more than a little armchair-pondering. The world this story lives in is confined to technology that is _non-magical_ and accessible. Through that technology, I hope, an amazing story emerges. More than that I hope the reader who rides along with those who try to live and among those machines can _feel_ how the machines behave, what they can and cannot do.

We now live in a world where technology has crossed a line into the magical, and there is no way to put that technology back in the bottle even if we wanted to. But it is possible in the context of fiction to imagine a world where the electro-mechanical remained the dominant root of our everyday technology for far longer than it did. It is possible to imagine that but for the geopolitical and economic winds blowing in a slightly different direction, the commerce and industry of our world could still be carried out by independent operators driving grease-coated machines steered by mechanical linkages, rather than corporations watching global satellite tracking on digital displays. This book is dedicated to those brave women and men who plied their trade under the waves of a world that, through historical happenstance and the hubris of our own technological and political classes, never existed.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


