subworld_story1_notes-and-todos.wiki
Last modified: Sun Jan 03, 2021  05:32PM

# Subworld Story 1 --- notes and todos
* [ ] Next up: make sure to incorporate drafts from below and from style experiments into the pseudocode
* remember to include a lot of spatial description: the reader should be able to SEE the sub/spaces in their head. 
	* build a map in their head for them.
	* See notes on memory house in writing
* maybe with the engine running full blast, it SOUNDS heavy and grimey, like dopesmoker.
	* try to think about what a listener to dopesmoker would want to read. 
* think carefully about where you "dive" into description:
	* character's clothing, for example, should just be mentioned in casual passing: "she placed the pencil into the front pocket of her cracking leather overalls."
	* but you might want to go all-in with description when they are staring at dials under pressure.
* remember to focus on _description_ of the grime, darkness, cold, hardness. Make it feel like Deadwood or Blood Meridian, though with good story. Do NOT make it feel like a sci-fi or naval/military story.
* consider NOT having any exterior shots. 
	* it may help the sense of isolation and being in a can if all action takes place _inside_ (the depot, the _Prospect_, the _Gnat_) 
* [ ] do you want to have a more exciting opening ala Mickey Spillane --- start in the middle of some violence?
	* If you want to try to sell it as a novel before finishing it, this might help pitch the book
* [ ] See if any of the above notes should be copied over to shuttlebay
* For story description: "For them, the only way to know the difference between living and dying is the small movement of a needle on a gauge."


----------------------------------------
## magnetic mines trading opening draft experiments

"Magnetic mines? What for?"

"Well, they're not actually magnetic mines. They are magnetic warheads
that can be fitted to a number of different delivery mechanisms like
torpedoes, placement arms, and yes mines."

"Why do you want to use our specialty shipping services? Why not just
ship them with a conventional authority transport?"

The dispatcher looked down at his clipboard before answering her
question.

"They aren't exactly destined for an authority stockpile, per se. They
need to be moved a little more under-the-radar, if you know what I
mean."

"Forget it. The less we know about their destination, the better."

---

"So you're asking us to move magnetic mines?" Captain Percy asked,
running a finger {let's avoid immediately revealing Percy is a woman}
down the oil-stained page attached to the black metal clipboard with
paint chipping off it.

"Magnetic warheads, to be precise. The units are agnostic about what
weapon they are installed in. Doesn't have to be a mine: could be a
torpedo, missile, suicide-bomber, sling-shot, whatever. The oceans these
days are teeming with rusting hulks that grind their way back and forth
across, and under, the surface of the Earth, leaving their silage [not
silage, what is that word?] of oil and carbon and noise trailing behind
them. And all of them are made of heavy, thick steel. There's more than
enough call for these things. Just deliver them to within a meter or two
of the sides of any of the beasts and _chunk_, _bam_, down goes your
target."

The verbosity on this guy disturbed Percy.

"So why us? Why not just ship them with conventional transport, stamped
and sealed by whichever Authority you are shipping them under? Or...
should I not ask?"

"Ah, yes. Well, as I mentioned, there is quite a demand for these...
tools. Many entities could put them to use, and many other entities
would sooner they didn't. Shipping under one Authority would only
attract the ire of some other Authority. Conventional shipping ends
up being an unwinnable game of tic-tac-toe with a high chance that
no matter how well stamped, sealed, and authorized a shipment like
this might be, it will simply never arrive at its destination due to,
shall we say, interference from another protagonist. The most reliable
way is to use a unit like yours, with your professional expertise at
clandestine maneuvering and your discreet interests. It's simply a
matter of reliability, you know. Nothing more."

"If we were any less reliable, I certainly wouldn't be standing here
talking to you right now.
----------------------------------------


----------------------------------------
## 'staring at dials' draft section
* {See style experiments in sub world shuttle bay for draft experiments of generalized scenes of going deep, staring at dials, listening. This section is for experimenting within the pseudocode 1.1 structure you already laid out.}

The _Prospect_ cruised on the uncanny oil-slick surface of the ocean,
partially submerged, with just the sail {fin} slicing through the glassy
surface and leaving a low wake behind them to mark their passage across
this curved globe. They left the sail above the waterline so they could
get the lookout mast as high as possible. In the lookout ring Gregory
clung, the hum of the diesels transmitted up the mast and crossed
into the soles of his feet through the rusted metal grating he stood
upon. With a pair of binoculars he scanned slowly around the horizon,
but there was nothing to be seen but a flat circle of dark infinity,
bisected with pure blackness on the lower half and almost-blackness on
the upper half, like peeping into a viewport that looked into a frozen
and unlit hell.

Five meters below Gregory, Percy stood on the deck of the sail dressed
in a black waxed overcoat with the collar turned up. The unvarying
resonance of her boat mixed with the unvarying ripple of the wake they
left behind and left her feeling numb, though the night was not very
cold. The hatch at her feet stood open, and a faint red glow rose up
through the open hole from the con.

"Anything Gregory?" She asked, more to break up the sensory deprivation
than because she expected any kind of affirmative answer.

"No. If they are out there, they are dark as we are."

"And we're not going to hear them until we can turn off the diesels."

"How much longer, do you think, before we can submerge and go back on
batteries?"

"The longer we can run the diesels the better, obviously. And while
it would charge them much faster, we can't run them too hot and loud.
It's all a game of how much charge we can put on the battery before
being found out on the surface here. We need at least a few hours at our
current charge rate."

Through the open hatch they heard Schemey's voice coming statically over
the mono speaker of the radio: "_Prospect_, _Prospect_, do you copy?"

"I've got you Schemey. Over." They heard Freddie's voice respond.
Schemey launched into his report.

"Yeah, you know, I managed to get those fuckers to chase me for an hour
or so by running the _Gnat's_ engines hot and noisy, but they must have
realized that I wasn't a transport sub because a few minutes ago they
broke off and headed back in your direction. I assume to try to listen
for you in a quieter place. Over."

"Hmm" Freddie said to himself. "Someone on their boat must have very
good ears."

Percy came down the ladder and took the mic from Freddie.

"Schemey, this is Percy. I want you to keep running as you are. If they
hear you continuing to move off, maybe they will doubt they made the
right move by not following you. Over."

"That will give me a chance to charge up my batts too. Over."

"OK. I'll have Freddie figure out some reasonable rendezvous point and
get back to you. Over out."

Percy hung the mic back up on the radio mounted above her and eased into
her captain's chair trying to think of what to do next.

"What do you think Freddie?"

Freddie took a hanging rag and wiped the lenses of his pince-nez before
placing them on the bridge of his nose and leaning over to look at the
row of dials that showed the engine RPMs and battery charge.

"It is, of course, a matter of the chance of them finding us on the open
ocean versus our ability to get our batteries charged. If they _do_ find
us, we will need all the charge we can get. I think we need to assume
they will fire on us again, and we will likely not get the warnings and
negotiations we usually get from Authority ships."

"Goddamn violent motherfuckers. Someone needs to tell them the wars are
over."

"Are they really?" Freddie asked.

"Let's not get into that again." Said Percy tiredly. "OK, lets start
shutting the diesels down every half hour or so and do a careful listen.
Maybe we'll manage to hear them before they get into any kind of firing
range."

"Hard on the engines all that stopping and starting. Chips isn't going
to like it."

"Chips won't like getting hit with a torpedo either. We can't just run
deaf for hours on end, it's too risky."

"I'll go have a chat with her." Freddie said, and lowered his huge body
down the ladder to the deck below.

Deep in the lower levels of the _Prospect_ the diesel engines fired
their syncopated and timed explosions by the thousand every minute. The
pulses blended together and spun the dynamos that generated the searing
force of electricity that was partially dumped straight into the giant
motors that spun the greasy drive shafts, and partially flowed into the
heavy leaded chemical concoctions that would store power for later. This
cycle of vibration drove through the whole boat, in a slow ruminating
bass rhythm that in one instance might lull a person almost to sleep,
and in another distract them totally from what they were doing. In many
cases it was a consoling drone of progress and maybe profit. In this
case it was a cutting drone of deaf and blind fear.


At 23 minutes after the hour, a randomly selected mark on the clock
dial, Percy lit the comms light to the engine room. A minute later she
heard Chips' voice echoing up the comms tube.

"Captain?"

"Shut down the diesels Chips. We're going to have a listen."

Chips didn't reply, but a minute later the loud throb of the diesels
that hadn't let up for hours died slowly away replaced with the only the
very soft hum of the electric motors still driving the boat along, like
they had reached a bridge in some epic piece of experimental music.

"Disengage the electric drive motors too {Donovan}. We need to get
as good a listen as possible. Someone wake up {Johnson} and get her
listening."

{Donovan} reached up and flipped a few large metal switches and the soft
hum of the electric motors died away just as the noise of the diesels
had. Freddie slipped down the ladder and passed through the hatch at the
read of nav to go find {Johnson's} rack in the crew quarters. Freddie
returned in a matter of a minute or so to the nav room with {Johnson}
following sleepily behind him. {Johnson} looked up as she passed under
to catch Percy's eye through the hatch down to nav.

"I'll have my headgear on in a second Pers."

Percy waited for Freddie to come up through the hatch and then slid down
the ladder herself. {Johnson} was already at the sonar station with one
of the bakelite speakers of the headset pressed against her right ear,
and the left speaker slightly off her ear so she could converse with
Percy.

{Johnson} was adjusting various knobs and switches, disengaging filters
used when the engine was running and boosting the gain on the mics.
Above the rows of knobs and switches was a set of rectangular meters
with needles wavering along graduated backgrounds and along with a
series of green, red, and amber lights showing the status of the various
listening filters. Above those was a large round dial indicating which
direction the underwater mics were oriented, and a large square meter
indicating the strength of any signals the mics received.

Percy stood behind {Johnson} with one hand on her shoulder, staring at
the meter indicating signal strength. {Johnson's} flipped a couple of
more filter switched and then her fingers gingerly wrapped around the
stainless steel wheel that controlled the direction of the underwater
mics.

"I'll do a quick 360 scan, and then go back over the rear 180 more
carefully, see if we can hear anyone following us." {Johnson} said.
Percy patted her shoulder gently, not wanting to distract her too much.

{Johnson} slipped the other speaker over her left ear, and her large
eyes went out of focus, resolved on some far-off point in space and
vaguely conscious of the direction and strength dials responding to the
movements of her fingers as most of her mental processing power focused
on the information coming oh so softly to her ears.

Percy watched the directional indicator dial waver around the 180 mark
and then slowly and steadily travel around the dial. The signal strength
meter barely came up off the pin. Percy grabbed a hanging rag and wiped
some small droplets of condensation from the indicator meter.

"Nothing." {Johnson} said. "Nothing at all."

"Not even the _Gnat_?" Asked Percy, "Schemey said he was running hot and
loud."

"Nope, he must be far off out of range of our mics. And if our friends
following us are anywhere nearby, they are completely shutdown at the
moment. No other surface traffic that I can hear either."

"Well, that's good then. We'll run the diesels back up."

"Let me do a quick scan of the areas behind us again, but my feeling is
you are good to go, for the moment."

Percy patted {Johnson} on the shoulder again, and climbed back up the
ladder to the cramped con. Freddie offered her the captain's chair he
was sitting in, but she gestured him to remain there. She lit the comms
light to engineering again and Chips came back on through the comms
tube.

"Cap?"

"Get ready to fire up the diesels again Chips. We're all clear on the
mics."

"Ach. The chain of demons that powers these machines do not like this
holy wavering of heat and cool. They're libel to rebel, and split their
prisons of metal twain. If we crack a block, it is only a matter of time
before we are dead in the water." Chips complained, her voice thinned
and elongated by passing through the comms tube, as if she were speaking
from the underworld prisons of her metaphorical demons herself.

"I know it as well as anyone Chips. But it's one risk among many, and
we don't have the luxury of choosing which we take at the moment."
Percy let the lid of the comms tube close, not really caring what other
complaints Chips had at the moment.

A few moments later the high-pitch whine of the electric starters
resonated through the submarine, followed by the sputtering and rolling
of diesel cylinders firing up. Soon the familiar droning hum was
vibrating their toes again, and power driving to the electric motors
pushing them ahead through the water.

Freddie touched Percy's arm.

"With the all-clear on the mics, I think we can assume those following
us are probably a good way off. It seems like we might want to run the
diesels low and at snorkel depth. We'll minimize the distance we could
be detected by that way." Freddie offered.

"We also lose our ability to have a lookout on the mast."

Freddie adjusted his slide-rule, and penciled a few numbers onto the
clipboard in his lap.

"My calculations suggest that if we didn't hear them on the mics, and
assuming they weren't laying still and silent close by, they must be
well beyond the range a lookout even high on the mast could see. I do
not anticipate that they could get within that range without us hearing
them first with our current plan to check the mics every half hour."
Freddie wiped his fingers on a rag and removed the pince-nez from his
nose to let them dangle on a chain.

Percy considered.

"You're probably right. And putting the rational argument aside, I
feel the natural instinct of any good sub like my baby here is to be
underwater as much as possible. Have Chips bring the diesels down to 1/4
power. {Donovan}: raise the snorkel and take us down to snorkel depth.
Freddie, since it's your idea to run at snorkel depth, you can take
first watch on the scope."

"Right" said Freddie, before getting on the comms tube with Chips.

The hum of the engine became a little less all-prevailing, and they all
settled in for a potentially long run of monotony. {Donovan}, with the
speed, course, and depth set found himself with little to do. He smoked
through one cigarette after another punctuated with the occasional cup
of coffee and regular glances up at his bank of dials that indicated
nothing had changed. Freddie hung his huge form on the control bars
of the periscope and swung it slowly back and forth, mostly watching
behind, but not neglecting to do a full circle every so often. Like
Gregory before him, there was nothing to see through the scope except
two shades of blackness, one belying the blackness of the other. It was
the kind of never-ending nothingness that seemed to Freddie to be the
true herald of death.

Percy found she could not long drag herself away from the bank of meters
that showed the charge on the batteries, which with the diesels running
at 1/4 were only climbing at a rate that felt like it would never get
into a zone where she might feel comfortable doing any kind of evasive
maneuvering with her boat.

At 53 minutes after the hour, she had Chips shut down the engines again,
and put {Johnson} through a roundabout with the mics again. And again
there was nothing out there but silence. Percy returned to the weary
hole of the con, and took over the scope from Freddie, who went off to
find some coffee.

Hours passed like this, the droning, the monotony, the only thing
changing being the slowly, slowly climbing needles on the battery charge
indicators.

Four hours of this. It was on the eighth time that they had the engines
shut down, and that sat silent in the water that {Johnson} heard
something. She was slowly swinging the mics around their rear starboard
side at about 160 degrees that there was a slight, but very real,
wavering of the signal strength indicator. It just popped its head up
for a second off the pin, like some prairie rodent checking for raptors.
{Johnson} spun the mic direction wheel back across the spot, and the
needle went up and down again. Back and forth she scanned, and each
time the needle moved and she was sure now that she could hear a faint
mechanical hum in hear earpiece when it did so.

"Pers!" {Johnson} yelled up to the con. "Pers, I've got something."

Percy slid down the ladder from the con and stepped up behind {Johnson},
her eyes on the signal-indicator needle as {Johnson} continued to scan
back and forth across the range that triggered it.

"Something, but not much. Any ideas?"

"It's mechanical, for sure. But they are either a good distance off, or
closer and very quiet."

"Keep the mics pegged to that spot for the moment. See if you can hear
anything that might help us figure out how far they are."

"You don't want me to ping them with active and get a certified
distance?"

"It's too risky. They'll know exactly where we are if we do that. Keep
listening, and maybe we'll get lucky and they'll give themselves away."

Percy climbed back up the ladder to the con, and as her head came
through the hatch she gave orders.

"Bring the sail back above the water. Get Gregory back up on the mast
with the binoculars and scanning rear, starboard. Let me know if he sees
anything. And do it very quietly."

At her listening station, {Johnson} could hear the hissing of compressed
air slowly pushing water out of the ballast tanks of the _Prospect_ and
could feel the boat slowly rising. The hissing air was loud enough to
make her uncomfortable, but she knew that they were letting the air in
as slowly as they could get away with. Hopefully the other sub was too
far off to make much of it.

In a few minutes they lay absolutely still in the water, with the sail
up above the surface. Through the mics {Johnson} could hear the sail
hatch gently opened, and Gregory's soft steps on the steel ladder up to
the lookout ring.

She focused on the sound behind that. She had the mics locked in on the
source of the mechanical sound in the water. It was nothing more than
a soft hum that had diffused itself across some unknown amount of the
dense medium they worked in, gently tickled the sensitive membranes of
the ship's mics, and then ran at lightspeed through the ships wiring,
pass the condensers and filters of her equipment, up the fading braided
wires of the headset and into her ears. For all that, it was nothing
but a pulpy mush of a signal, barely discernible as mechanical save for
the slow cycle of rising and falling just a few hertz, but in a evenly
repetitive way that was unmistakable.

And then {Johnson} heard a clink. Some kind of metal touched something,
somewhere out in that black expanse. A sharp, high sound, unrepeated.
The needle on the signal-strength meter made a distinct point about it
before returning to it's spot just above the pin. It took {Johnson}
a few beats to process it, but her brain came back with the answer:
cutlery. A steel fork perhaps, stabbed too forcefully through a small
hunk of blooded meat.

"Percy!" {Johnson} yelled up to the con, "they're right on us!"

Gregory, in the lookout ring, had been scanning the black-on-black
horizon, back and forth across the range {Johnson} had given him.
Now a vertical black line moved steadily up across the field of his
binoculars. He lowered them down instinctively, and there before him
rose a shadowy leviathan, breaking through the surface of the flat
sea. It was so dark that Gregory would have thought it was literally a
leviathan: a whale or a giant squid or something, except as soon as it's
huge dorsal area split the surface, two holes appeared in it's back,
from which poured out red light, like the eyes of some corrupted pet of
hell.

The shadows of people briefly caused the eyes to blink, and Gregory knew
they were on the deck of the sub that followed them merely hundreds of
meters away.

"The beast!" cried Gregory, and dropped down the ladder to the deck
of the _Prospect's_ sail. A burst of heavy machine gun fire split the
silence and echoed out in concentric rings across the water. Sprigs
of flame lit up the deck of the sub following them, and lead smacked
heavily against the steel of the sail and echoed through the hull of the
_Prospect_.

"Take us down!" Percy yelled to her entire crew. She looked up through
the hatch at Gregory, still on the deck of the sail.

"Gregory! Get down here, and seal that hatch. We're diving."

Through the hatch they could hear a loud, low voice, enlarged by
loudspeakers mounted to the sail of the following sub so that all
enunciation blended together into one long echoing drone of command,
like the voice of a dog's possessing demons that drive the vulnerable
ones to murder.

"Do not submerge. Disengage your motors and prepared to be boarded."

This was followed by a long string of regional control organizations,
treaty clauses, and naval ranks by which the following sub conveyed it's
unshakeable and inviolable authority to issue such a command. But this
ever-expanding description of pyramidal powers was cut off by Gregory
closing the sail hatch.

More shrapnel smacked against the sail and along the hull of the
_Prospect_ just below the waterline. Percy winced involuntarily, there
was no telling what kind of damage they could be doing. It might be
nothing, or it might wound the _Prospect_ in just a particular way that
under exactly the right pressure of water, at some unknowable depth, the
whole boat would collapse on itself.

{Donovan} and {Gregory} looked at her in fear. Freddie looked back
at them steadily through his pince-nez and told them to get the boat
underwater.

"We're safe from bullets underwater."

"Yeah, but not from torpedoes. Why didn't they just torpedo us already?"
{Donovan} asked. "It doesn't seem like they have much compunction about
sending us to the bottom."

"They were too close, they need to be at a minimum safe distance to fire
without risking blowing themselves up. And they also thought there was a
chance they could capture our boat if we had been scared enough to just
roll over."

"So we're not that scared?" {Donovan} asked, spinning open the flood
valves.

Percy didn't answer. Throughout the whole of the _Prospect_ huge volumes
of water poured into the ballast tanks as air was displaced up pipes and
vented out above them in streams of bubbles.

"Set the planes down steep." Said Freddie. "Full power to the electric
motors, drive us down as fast as possible." {Gregory} pushed the main
throttles all the way forward, and the hum of the powerful electric
motors rose up around them mixing with the terrifying sound of water
rushing in to fill the boat. The rows of smaller dials showing the
tank-fill status, with their pitted chrome casings, and one with a
cracked glass face, all rose evenly and quickly.

The _Prospect's_ bow tilted towards the depths, and everyone in the con
found a seat or grabbed a hanging leather strap counter-angling against
the incline. They were going down fast enough that they could feel their
stomachs rise slightly against the descent.

"Tell me what they are doing {Johnson}!" Percy yelled through the open
hatch.

{Johnson} pushed her straight blonde strands of hair behind her ears and
put her headphones on again."Ya Pers. I can hear their tanks flooding
too. They are following us down."

"Alright." Percy considered for a moment and turned to Freddie. "We're
actually safe for the moment because we're _too_ close to them. They
have nothing they can hit us with underwater at close range. Assuming
they will continue to be as murder-minded as they have been, they'll
want to get some distance between us so they can put a torpedo in the
water."

"That is sound reasoning." Freddie replied. "Should we take this moment
to try talking them into _not_ shooting at us? Someone over there must
be a reasonable person and realise we are an unarmed cargo sub."

"The best-case scenario if we can convince them not to shoot is we have
to let them aboard for an inspection, right? We aren't going to pass any
inspections with weapons parts aboard, and I'm willing to bet these guys
are unbribeable."

"That was my conclusion too, but I wanted to make sure we were
considering the pragmatic way of staying alive."

"No, we have a chance right now to disappear while they try to get some
distance between us. We're going to take it."

"Percy," {Johnson} called up from the listening station, "they've revved
up their motors and are turning."

"They are going for distance. They want to fire on us." Freddie said.

Percy looked at the depth gauge: 100 meters. "{Johnson} how far away are
they?"

{Johnson} pushed a button on some range-finding equipment next to her
and a moment later yelled up to Percy, "340 meters."

"OK, let me know immediate if they start a turn."

Percy looked at Freddie, and said out loud what he was thinking, "If
they have rear tubes for launching torpedoes, we'll have no warning. But
if they only have forward tubes, we'll know they are about to fire when
they come back around."

Freddie wiped his fingers on a hanging rag. "They are so close it will
only be a matter of moments from when then launch the torpedo though."

"Push her down {Donovan}."

"I don't think I could ever get used to going down fast like this,
controlled or no." said {Donovan}, as if voicing his fear might let some
of it out from his guts and disperse it around the room a little. His
eyes were focused on the larger depth gauge that stood next to their
speed gauge at the top of the stacks of dozens and dozens of dials and
readouts on the front wall of the con. Along with some input from the
nav station and the listening station on the deck immediately below the
con, below periscope depth, this wall of dials was the only source of
information about what was happening to the boat, and what was going on
outside the boat. The depth, speed, health, status, mechanical settings,
the whole picture of how the boat was doing could be read from this wall
of dials. And what {Donovan} was reading at the moment was that the sub
was being put through the very limits of it's endurable capabilities.
The rising and falling needles on the dials, most of which moved most
of the time with a deliberate and controlled slowness, were all rapidly
chasing new positions. The RPM indicators for the electric motors were
near red-line, the battery indicators were showing the batteries being
drained so fast that he could see the needles falling on the dials. The
plane angle indicators were pinned at their steepest angle, and the
ballast tank status indicators were rapidly pushing towards a completely
flooded boat. The depth indicator was the one that {Donovan's} eyes kept
coming back to though. He had never seen it move so fast, showing him
quantitatively what he knew from the lightened weight of his stomach:
the _Prospect_ was a many-thousand-ton steel stone dropping through
the water column. It was hard to imagine what would stop the boat from
simply winking out of existence in the never-ending blackness of the
deepest parts of the ocean, crushed like distant matter pulled into a
singularity.

Depth gauge check: between 175 and 180 meters. Everyone silently gripped
their stations.

"They're turning Percy!" {Johnson} called. And a minute later,
"torpedo!"

In a few moments they could hear the ringing ping of the torpedo's
homing sonar echoing through the _Prospect_, the frequency of the pulses
steadily getting quicker.

"Down, we have to get deeper." Percy whispered to herself.

Where a moment before {Donovan} was fearing some unknown depth at which
the _Prospect_ would cease to exist, now he found himself squeezed in
the jaws of a closing vise, between an explosive torpedo that could end
the _Prospect_ and the crushing pressure of water that could also end
them.

Percy looked up. They were passing 200 meters. The pinging was fast
enough that they all knew the torpedo was almost on them. And then there
was a creeping silence where they had all expected the next sound to be
their eardrums pressed in by the shock wave of an explosion.

"The torpedo imploded Percy!" cried {Johnson}.

{Donovan} looked at Percy, hoping for an explanation.

"Most of the torpedoes on these Authority subs are older ones they
manufactured huge numbers of. They can't go below 200 meters or so. It's
possible that they are loading a more modern ones into their tubes right
now that can reach us, and all we've done is delayed the inevitable.
Keep diving {Donovan}."

"212 meters down." Said {Donovan}. {perhaps something about every 10
meters being another atmosphere goes here -- see other style experiments
writings}

"What are they doing {Johnson}?" Percy asked loudly.

A silent moment passed, and then {Johnson} called back, "they've leveled
off around 200 meters down. Seems like they aren't willing to follow us
deep."

"They are going to wait us out." Percy said to Freddie.

"They probably figure we don't have a full battery charge and they won't
have to wait very long, and they are right: we're at about 40%." Said
Freddie, glancing over the battery charge dials.

"OK {Donovan}, level us out. Hold us at this depth for the moment."

{Donovan} eased up the wheel on the dive plane, pulled the throttle back
to the zero mark, and flipped some switches. The electric hum died away
as the deck of the boat came up under their feet to something like level
ground. {Gregory} eased open some of the valves controlling airflow
to the ballast tanks, and a soft hissing whispered through the boat.
The ballast tank fill needles worked their way slowly back toward the
middle marks on their dials. The depth gauge slowed and slowed, and then
finally locked in at 232 meters.

{from here, trying to adjust style of Percy's character to be more
aggressive, commanding, yet fallible -- see character notes}

--------------------

{
{Donovan} was starting to panic, his eyes were wide and unblinkingly
scanning the wall of dials, and sweat was running in threads down his
temples. The tips of his fingers were wrapped around the dive plane
controls, ready for the instant he could level off the boat, not wanting
to risk a stray meter downward he didn't have to. Percy stepped forward,
her feet angled against the incline of the deck, and put her hand on his
shoulder. She watched the dials more calmly. At their current depth she
was not worried about her boat, even going through stressing maneuvers
like this. She was worried about the one following them.

"{Johnson}, stay on them. Let me know exactly what they are doing."
Percy called down to the listening station.

"So what do we do Freddie?"

"I've been thinking about it. We can assume they are moving away from
us. They'll probably move pretty fast, enough that we can hear their
electric motors. What if we follow them? Try to stay close enough that
they can't shoot at us? At least until we can figure out something
else."

"I'm sure they will expect us to try to slink off, so that at least has
the element of surprise. It might give us a chance to figure something
out. Maybe we can find the _Gnat_ and Schemey can run interference."

"It's a big risk, because they'll almost certainly find us in moments if
we are close by."
}

--------------------

{
A loud ping passed through the length of the hull of the _Prospect_.

"Woop!" {Johnson} yelled up through the hatch to the con. "Well, they
know where we are now. But we know where they are too, hang on..." At
her listening station, {Johnson} read numbers off of readout that had
locked in when they detected the overwhelming signal of the ping. She
punched numbers from those readouts into a little calculating machine
that was screwed to the wall next to her, and twisted some dials. {this
might actually be automatic from the sonar rig} "Pers, they are under at
120 meters, 560 meters from us at 172 degrees." {Johnson} stepped over
to the chart table at the nav station and looking to over to re-read the
numbers again from the computing machine, marked their position and the
position of the Authority sub on the chart.
}
