pseudocode-subworld_story1.wiki
Last modified: Mon Jan 25, 2021  12:37PM

# Full pseudocode (draft 2) of subworld story 1
-------------------------------------------------



-------------------------------------------------
## pseudocode example (as used in filthy scum rising)
### Section/scene description gets three ###s

* {paragraph description --- remember use the _graf_ as the unit of composition}
* [ ] A line that should be added to final --- whether as is, or needing to be re-written.
	{thought or comment on above line}

* {paragraphs separated by space, above, new graf below, description of what the graf covers in this line}
* [ ] First line of second graf
	> draft attempt at actual prose {especially good if you have a good idea for prose while putting together pseudocode}
-------------------------------------------------



-------------------------------------------------


### opening dialog with trader in remote clandestine sub depot

* {establish the use and possibilities of the magnetic warhead cargo}
* [ ] So they are magnetic mines? percy asks
	> "So they're magnetic mines?" Captain Percy asked, running a finger down the oil-stained page attached to a metal clipboard with chipping black paint.
* [ ] Magnetic _warheads_ the depot trader explains, can be used on any weapon. describe why there's so much call for them, and how effective they are.
	> "Magnetic warheads, to be precise. The units are agnostic about what weapon they are installed in. Doesn't have to be a mine: could be a torpedo, missile, suicide-bomber, sling-shot, whatever. The oceans teem with rusting hulks, grinding their way back and forth across, and under, the surface of the sea, leaving their sillage {maybe don't use this word} of oil and carbon and noise trailing behind them. And all of them are made of heavy, thick steel. There's more than enough call for these weapons. Just deliver them to within a meter or two of the sides of any of the beasts and _chunk_, _bam_, down goes your target."
* [ ] Percy is annoyed by how verbose this guy is.
	> The verbosity on this guy disturbed Percy.

* {establish the reason to use smugglers; hint at role of authorities}
* [ ] So why us? percy asks
	> "So why us? Why not just ship them with conventional transport, stamped and sealed by whichever Authority you are shipping them under? Or...  should I not ask?"
* [ ] Explain how shipping under authority seal doesn't mean hassle-free shipping for things that another authority might have an issue with, like weapon parts. Using gray-area shipping (smugglers) is the most reliable way to ship.
	> "Ah, yes. Well, as I mentioned, there is quite a demand for these...  tools. Many entities could put them to use, and many other entities would sooner they didn't. Shipping under one Authority would only attract the ire of some other Authority. Conventional shipping ends up being an unwinnable game of tic-tac-toe with a high chance that no matter how well stamped, sealed, and authorized a shipment like this might be, it will simply never arrive at its destination due to, shall we say, interference from another protagonist. The most reliable way is to use a specialty shipping services unit like yours, with your professional expertise at clandestine maneuvering and your discreet interests. It's simply a matter of reliability, you know. Nothing more."
	> "Certainly if we were any less reliable, I wouldn't be standing here talking to you right now.

* {depot trader flirts with Percy}
* [ ] {the depot guy floats some kind of flirty line at her, and she rejects him smartly: 'married to my boat'}
	{consider not revealing Percy is female till later.}
	> "Ah hmm. Reliable for sure. And might I say quite handsome as well. Perhaps you would like to move to the depot canteen and quench your thirst?"
	> "{Flintock,} If you are suggesting what I think you are suggesting, then I need to remind you of the old cliche about captains that says: I'm married to my boat. You can't compete with her."

* {wrap up negotiation for cargo haul}
* [ ] Trader wants to confirm Percy accepts the job
	> "Well. Regardless, are you at least willing to take this delicate cargo off my worn and tired hands?"
* [ ] Percy wants to see if she can get assurance about non-interference from Authorities {this is just due-diligence negotiating --- she wants to make her job as safe as possible}
	> "Can you promise me there won't be trouble with any of the Authorities if I take this job?
* [ ] Trader says safety is not a guarantee, but offers good pay to offset the risk
	> "You know an honest trader cannot make a promise like that these days. However, out of a surfeit of respect for your, ah, reliability, I am willing to offer 20 percent above the standard hull-load fee. Provided the cargo arrives at the destination."
* [ ] They negotiate the details; the trader offers a good sum
	> "How much up front?"
	> "Also recognizing the delicate nature of this cargo, I'll generously offer to pay you the full standard hull-load fee now, and the 20 percent additional on arrival. How does that sound?"
* [ ] Percy accepts it, thinking for the amount he's offering he must really want to move it.
	> Generous indeed, Percy thought. This guy must really want this cargo out of his depot.
	> "...Alright. We'll move the stuff."
* [ ] Depot trader settles details about when to send his cargo loaders down to Percy's sub.
	> "Excellent, can we being loading immediately?"
	> "Sure. If you send your loaders down to the dock you should find someone in the boat who will tell you where to stash the cargo.  I'll radio ahead that I OK'd it."
	> "I expect my loaders will be there within the hour."

* {Percy questions the trader about the possibility of hiring a sonar operator}
* [ ] {When do you reveal her boat is a sub? sonar is going to give it away to most people --- who don't know a ship is likely to have sonar as well}
* [ ] Percy asks the trader if he knows someone she could hire for sonar
	{This could also be the bartender slightly further down; or another character in the supply store or something.}
	> "Hey, I'm short a crew member, someone who can sit sonar watch. Do you know if there's anyone here on the depot that I could hire?"
* [ ] There's no hireable help available because most hands have been hired by other big boats coming through recently
	> "Eh, a string of big cruisers have been through recently, hired everyone off."
* [ ] Percy is desperately short on hands though
	> "Shit. I'm a little desperately short of hands."
* [ ] The trader, offers an unskilled woman who he had brought on as a prostitute
	> "Well... if you're willing to take _anyone_, I've got someone you might try."
	> "Maybe not _anyone_, what have you got?"
	> "This waif I brought over from the mainland to whore out. But she's too skinny and small. The tastes of most of the folks who come through here are for something a bit... harder. She also..."
	> "What?"
* [ ] She's just too skinny and sad to be a good whore
	> "She's got just the saddest of faces, and she's too shy. Even I can't bring myself to be comfortable pimping her out. A pimp has got to have a heart you know."
* [ ] Can she do sonar work?
	> "You're the great heart of the world, I'm sure, {Flintock}. Does she have good ears?"
* [ ] She's young and into music, so maybe
	> "How would I know? I stay away from those cursed subs of yours. But she's young and always listening to music on her little radio. Maybe that's an indicator her ears are are least not ruined yet?"
* [ ] Percy isn't in the military, she'll take her if she isn't completely deaf
	> "Fuck it. I'm not going to battle, if she's not completely deaf, she can sit sonar watch during the runs."
* [ ] The trader says he'll have her meet Percy over at the canteen
	> "Good. I need that little shadow out of my life. I'll tell her to meet you over at the canteen."
* [ ] The trader would want to get something for the service though; need to figure that out.


### Interim: depot description, a little time passes before Percy gets back to her boat

* {Percy walks through the main hall of the depot; describe depot: filthy and noisy, akin to the sub building location in red october maybe}
* [ ] > Captain Percy hummed to herself as she left the depot office and walked through the main hall of the noisy depot, and she realized that her humming was resonating in her skull with the ever-present background hum of the machinery that kept the place functioning.
* [ ] > Above her own tuneless humming and the resonating background hum the noisy work of this busy depot impinged on all efforts at contemplation. Welders in heavy suits of cracked brown leather and steel masks of black crawled over huge black steel tubes, occasionally illuminating the deep shadows with their punctuated and snapping arcs that briefly liquefied the steel that formed all the structures of Percy's world.
* [ ] > She stepped around the oil pools on the concrete floor as she made her way.
* [ ] > Everywhere was the smell of tobacco smoke, oil, and sharp ozone, mixed with the occasional clink of chains rolling through a block, straining to lift some mass of a metal object. 
* [ ] > There was also the inevitable and unintelligible shout of panic or correction as some other massive metal object did not do what it was supposed to do.

* {describe the sides of the depot, not-main-hall; describe how there are shops and workstations set back along the walls between stored crates of supplies and goods}
* [ ] > All this noise and work happened in the main hall of the depot because that was where the space was to do it.
* [ ] > Along the walls of the hall, back in the less well-lit shadows, were stacked an uncountable number of crates, mostly of wood, in some places 20 feet high.
* [ ] > Mixed among these crates, here and there in an alcove set back from the wall, were tables set up by traders who negotiated the value of the crates and where they would be moving from or to.
* [ ] > This whole part of the depot was hollowed out of stone underground. At one end of the main hall was a large elevator that connected up to the surface, where there was an outdoor storage yard of dirt and pebble, surrounded by layered fences of rusting barbed wire.
* [ ] > At the other end of the hall was a string of bays where the boats were docked. 

* {Percy steps into a shop}
	* {might want to delete this graf in favor of introducing Cass section}
* [ ] Percy steps into a shop; describe shop
	> Captain Percy had a list of some hardware she needed for her boat, so she veered off into one of the alcoves where the proprietor had cracked open a number of crates and they stood open on their tops or sides, batting and hay used as packing material spilling out onto the cold concrete ground.
* [ ] She selects some things and purchases them.
	* {It would be best if these were things that somehow related to the story later on} 


### Percy talks to Cass about hiring her as a sonar operator

* {Percy heads down towards the bar/canteen}
* [ ] Percy walks down the main hall a little further and then steps into a bar/canteen
* [ ] describe bar/canteen
* [ ] Percy steps up to the bar; describe bar itself
	> She steps up to the bar that is nearly at the height of her chest. It is broad and made of dark wood from which decades of drinkers had worn away the original shellac coating, and a universe of spilled drinks had stained to a mottled gray color.

* {Percy meets Cass}
* [ ] At one end of the bar sits Cass; describe Cass
	> At one end sits a tiny girl, with enormous brown eyes.

* {A shaky intro between Cass and Percy}
* [ ] > Percy walked up to her. "God with eyes like that can you see in the dark?"
* [ ] > "I wish," she said, staring into her drink.
* [ ] > "You're like some kind of small prey animal. Do you always keep alert for predators out there in the dark?"
* [ ] > "Do you just hang around bars making fun of people who want to be left alone?"
* [ ] > "Easy, I'm not trying to fuck you. I think you're the kid I'm looking for, Cassandra?"
* [ ] > "Oh, are you the person {Flintock} said I should talk to? I go by Cass."

* {Percy tries to suss out Cass' potential skills on sonar}
* [ ] > "Ya. Look, I've got a boat, I'm leaving here tonight. You ever work on a boat before? Or anything technical? Maybe, god-willing, sonar or something sonics related?"
* [ ] > "God no. I'm a whore. Or, supposed to be. Apparently I'm not very good at that."
* [ ] > "On a boat nobody cares how good you are at fucking. All I need is someone who is good at being alone for long periods of time and listening to ambient noise on the sonar. Think you could do that."

* {Cass expresses interest}
* [ ] Add something here about Cass wondering about how dangerous it is. Submarining is always incredibly dangerous, but can also be very rewarding.
* [ ] > Cass looked up at her. "I'd give it a try..."

* {Percy offers her the job}
* [ ] > "Fine. You got the job. We'll train you on board. Come down to bay 7 {be sure to correlate this with where Percy goes later...} with your stuff in an hour or two and be ready to leave. Oh, and don't expect to be paid any time soon or very much. For a new share, passage out of here is part of your payment, and when and if we arrive and unload our cargo, you will get paid something out of the job-completion portion of the money. I don't know how much, Hemi handles the math, talk to him when you get on board if you want to know."
* [ ] > "I'm OK with that."
* [ ] > "You better be. Other than when you're on sonar, you keep your mouth shut and stay out of the way. The last thing any of the rest of the crew or me need is some new kid slowing down our work."
* [ ] > Cass had the good sense to not say anything. Percy laid a heavy hand on her shoulder, stood, threw some coins clinking onto the bar and walked away.


### Percy heads down the tunnel towards the docks and up to the _Prospect_

* {Percy walks down the tunnel to the sub mating docks}
* [ ] > With a couple of drinks sloshing in her empty belly, Percy heads back out and down the main hall.
* [ ] > It's quieter now, apparently while in the bar alcove she had crossed the threshold of time by which the people creating most of the noise in the main hall judged their day's labors to be done.
* [ ] > There were only a few people left, closing up safes with an echoing clang, and hammering shut crates they did not want to leave open over night before heading up to the hall to the elevator to the surface.
* [ ] > The heels of Percy's boots echo back at her from the curving stone walls.

* {the water and grime runs downhill}
* [ ] > The tunnel has a gentle downward slope so any natural water seeping in drains down to the bottom.
* [ ] > But along with that water goes any garbage, oils, chemicals, metal shavings, and dropped coffee.
* [ ] > The grit of the floor grinds under her boot.

* {into the docking area where the magnetic mines are stacked, ready to load}
* [ ] > A quarter mile down, the tunnel passes over rusted and choked drainage grates in the floor, just before it narrows and there are 6 transport-submarine underwater mating docks on either side.
* [ ] > In front of dock 4L, there are stacked a few dozen wooden crates, cargo being prepped for loading onto her boat.
* [ ] > Each of the crates is branded with "XL industries" and "CAUTION!"
* [ ] > XL Industries knows better than to say "explosives" which might attract undue attention in some instances during an Authority inspection. But they still felt that anyone handling their material should maybe have a bit of a heads up that it shouldn't just be tossed around casually.


### shortly later, _Prospect_ is being loaded 

* {Percy steps onto the Prospect; description of the sub; that it has a cargo bay because it is a transport sub}
* [ ] > Percy stepped over the short ramps the cargo loaders had placed over the ledge of mating collar of the dock and stepped into her boat: the merchant transport submarine _Prospect_.
	* {see note a couple of grafs down about how it might be a hatch in the floor, thus no ramps}

* {describe how the boat is docked by the forward loading hatch mated to an underwater depot dock}
	* {It's possible that the _Prospect_ only has a big loading hatch on the top? Would be kinda cool to have guys lowering stuff through the loading hatch.}
		* {In which case the docking bay might have big hatches in the floor subs connect to; it juts out from the rock face and subs come up underneath} 
	* {Is the hatch an air lock? Is it really just a bulkhead pressure door? have to think this out.}
* [ ] > Like most merchant subs, the _Prospect_ had a single enormous cargo hold.
* [ ] > From where Percy stood now, a giant black maw, whose lips were pursed and sucked against the airlock dock of the depot.

* {magnetic warheads loaded carefully through forward loading-hatch, stacked in carefully packed wooden crates with a brand on the side; then they are lashed into the cargo bay}
* [ ] > The gang of men doing the loading, huge swarthy men wearing moth-eaten tweed and leather suits and chomping on various forms of tobacco or seeds, were swarming around a large push cart stacked high with the wooden "Caution" crates, and swinging crates off it from chains connected to a block hanging from an anchor point on the roof of the cargo bay.
* [ ] > As they moved the crates into the cargo bay of the sub, they arranged them like puzzle pieces, and then lashed them with inch-thick hemp rope to fixed loops welded to the walls of the submarine.
	* {This line maybe goes below, where the Prospect crew member is watching them stow the cargo, and telling them how to best do it.}
* [ ] > A shorter man wearing a bowler with the felt worn off occasionally broke in with direction on how best to move the crates. 

* {introduce a new character in the loading bay; maybe one of the conns, leaning against the hull, (maybe asleep?) casually monitoring the loading of the boat.}
* [ ] > He was talking to a short woman in leather overalls and a thick braid of black hair.
* [ ] > Percy walked up to them. "How did you get stuck on loading duty Chips?"
* [ ] > "The sour prospects of fortune are determined by the winds that blow out of hell, Cap."
* [ ] > "Indeed, especially when your cargo is explosive. I need you prepping the diesel, I want to get out of here tonight. Go get {Sanchez} and have him watch these guys."
* [ ] > "That's well. I'd much rather tend my tiny controlled explosions than watch these packages of chaos demons loaded aboard."
* [ ] > "We can finish up down here if you ladies have work to do." Interjected the short man. He seemed nervous, as one might well be when maneuvering explosive materials inside a steel tube under 50 meters of water. It wasn't _likely_, but if anything should happen, there was no escape for any of them.
* [ ] > "Yeah, no offence, but we always have a crew member monitor loading, even when it isn't as buttery as this cargo."
* [ ] > "Suit yourself, it's your boat."
* [ ] > "Yes, it is."
* [ ] > Chips headed off into the depths of the ship to relate with her diesel engine and see if she could dig up {Sanchez}.


### on the boat for the first time --- description of the _Prospect_

* {Describe the _Prospect_}
* {update this according to revisions that (need to be) made to the _Prospect_ diagrams based on what you've learned from research -- centered engines, ballast tanks located around the outside of the pressure hull, etc}
* [ ] {fuel and supplies being loaded too; a long, worn and greasy fuel hose runs up the center of the cargo bay}
* [ ] > The cargo bay of the _Prospect_ was maybe 60 meters long.
* [ ] > The front three quarters or so were generally kept empty, or filled with cargo for a specific job.
* [ ] > The part furthest from her was filled with the boat's working supplies: spare parts, canned foods they never intended to open, a slapped-together wooden workbench they had a constant need for and nowhere else to stash.
* [ ] > Behind that was a hatch that led to the lower decks where the engine room and the mechanical rooms were located.
* [ ] > Next to the hatch to the lower-decks was a short steel stair that led to the upper decks which ran the length of the boat, all the way forward above the cargo bay.
* [ ] > They contained all the crew cabins of the boat: galley, crew quarters, captain's quarters, and a large room they referred to as "stowage" --- and which was where Percy really thought the workbench belonged, if there had been room for it.
* [ ] > Above that was the conn and the sail


### Percy goes up to the conn, meets Hemi

* {Percy goes up to the conn; introduce Hemi who is going over technical preparations of the boat}
* {Probably need to introduce other secondary characters here too}


### they embark

* {seal up boat and disconnect}
	* this might not be a place for a lot of description, just enough to get the technical ideas across
	* {don't make too big a thing of the technical details, it will take away from the story and the tone}


### underway

* {describe basic operation of boat; maybe here is where you introduce how they need to run on the surface/snorkel to recharge the batteries from the diesel engines}
	* {Explain here that snorkeling is louder than running on the surface? This might fit better elsewhere}
* {dialog about authorities?}
* {dialog about concern about carrying magnetic mines? weapons are more likely to attract authority attention than any other cargo, even drugs or fuel}


### training Cass scene

* {Might need something earlier on where Percy tells Hemi he needs to train Cass}
* {down at the sonar station, Hemi takes some downtime to give Cass her first lesson on sonar}
* {Intros needed for the two of them?}
* [ ] > Hemi handed Cass a set of headphones and she put them on matting down here hair where the band crossed her head. Hemi picked up a second set and plugged them into the sonar unit.

* {How the passive sonar works}
	* {Do you want to say something about how using mics at either end of the sub allows a sonar operator to calculate distance (to a certain extent) of a sonar target?}
* [ ] > "OK" said Hemi "this is the 'passive' sonar unit. It's nothing more than microphones to listen underwater. There's 'active' sonar too -- that's a lot more complicated, and you don't have to worry about it for now. There's also some filters and transducers and stuff for the passive sonar that you'll learn later, but for now the main thing you need to know is that you can turn the microphones around using this big wheel." Hemi turn the wheel a half turn. "See that dial there? That shows you which way the microphones are pointed, it goes around 360 degrees. At some point someone will ask you to listen in a specific direction. They will give you the degrees and you just turn the wheel until the needle on that dial shows you are aiming the mics in the direction they are asking about. Got it?"
* [ ] > "Seems simple enough."

* {How the signal strength indicator dial works}
* [ ] > "That part is. Don't worry, it gets a lot more complex. Now, the gauge above the directional indicator is the main signal strength indicator. All those smaller gauges above that show the strength at different frequencies, but you only need to worry about this main signal strength indicator for now. Watch that needle, if you see it jump, there's a significant sound out there in the water, and you'll want to listen to try and figure out what it is."
* [ ] > "Alright, I'm with you."

* {Cass does her first listen attempt; describe what basic sub operation sounds like}
* [ ] > "First let's just listen to what's going on right now." Hemi and Cass both remained quiet for a minute. "OK Cass, what do you hear?"
* [ ] > "I don't know... white noise?"
* [ ] > "Almost anything could be white noise. Describe it with more detail than that."
* [ ] > "There's... a low rumble, a bit of a swishing sound..."
* [ ] > "Good. We're running on the electric motor, underwater, at a modest speed. That's what it sounds like when we run like that. Later, when we're near the surface with the diesel engines running, it'll be a lot louder and you won't be able to hear much in the water beyond the engines. But while we're on the electric motor right now, we can hear more. Let's see..." Hemi turned the direction dial slowly. About a quarter of the way around the strength indicator dial moved up a little and wavered there. "What do you hear now?"

* {Cass identifies breaking surf on the second attempt}
* [ ] > Cass listened, her eyes watching the signal strength indicator needle wavering like a humming bird feeding. It was moving in response to another kind of white noise, higher pitched than the sub's engines, which she could still hear rumbling in lower frequencies. This sound was familiar, a washing, churning sound with an occasional rumble mixed in... She smiled, "it's breaking surf isn't it?"

* {Cass identifies a dolphin.}
* [ ] > "Right! We're only a few miles out from the coast, you can still hear the breakers. Let's see what else is out there." Around the directional needle went, and Hemi slowed it, and stopped with the strength indicator needle throbbing slightly, like it had a pulse.
* [ ] > Cass closed her eyes. In her headphones she could hear a distant clicking, slow and regular. The clicks had a richness to them, they bounced around the underwater landscape, and she could hear not just the clicks but also the echoes of the clicks. The dark world out there lit up in her mind, and she remembered storybooks about sea life from not so very long ago when she was a child. "Is that the sound dolphins make?"
* [ ] > "Very good! Dolphins use active sonar. They are better at it than we are."

* {Hemi gives a positive report about Cass to Percy}
* [ ] > Hemi left her there listening to the dolphins and climbed up next to Percy. "We might have a pair of ears yet."
* [ ] > "That would be nice. The rest of these fuckers are useless on sonar."


### re-surfacing

* {they run for 24 hours; and when night comes they decide with the batteries down to 1/3 that they should surface and run the diesels}
	* {This needs to be at least 24 hours if they left the depot after hours, since you want the depot raid to be about 12 hours later, when it's busy, and the Gnat still needs enough time to catch up}
	* {Remember: generally the run on the surface at night, underwater or at least snorkeled during the day}

* {on the surface they fire up the engines, and run loud and pretty fast; 2/3s of full speed maybe}

* {the engines sound like dopesmoker}
	> With the diesels running up towards their max rpms, the whole boat shook with the drone of the grinding fuel burners.
	> And running on the surface meant the boat was also moved by the ocean swell. 
	> The boat ground out a slow pace, up and over the swell, a slight roll, and the loud drone of the engines humming in their ears, the bass-frequency vibrations coming up through their toes.

* {hours go by, boredom sets in}


### they are fired on

* {they are all half-asleep on the midnight watch: bleary-eyed, staring at the dials, bored out of their minds, numb from the sensory deprivation sound, hum, and vibration of the ceaseless and unvarying engine rumbling through the boat}
	* {nobody is on sonar because it's not military ship, and because you can't hear anything above the sound of the engine anyway}	
	* {it would be better if they were fired on before they meet the Gnat --- create a sense of mystery why they are being attacked.}
		* {again pursued by faceless evil, like butch cassidy}
		* {there could be some dialog, possibly funny, where they wonder why THEY are being persecuted, innocent smugglers that they are}

* {a torpedo passes extremely close by}
* [ ] > In the darkened conn, Captain Percy's sensitive ears semi-consciously picked out a new sound among the rumbling drone of the engines. Something high-pitched, like a bird-of-prey a great distance off. Before she knew what it was, her fingers gripped the browning steel armrests of the captain's chair. She became conscious of it as it rapidly grew louder, and then a sudden grinding whine echoed through the conn and they all jumped alert.
* [ ] > "torpedo." Percy said. 
* [ ] > "Close one." Hemi replied cooly but with simmering nerves. 
* [ ] > "Some fuck is shooting at us? Some fuck is trying to rape my boat?" 

* {They shut down the diesels and submerge to periscope depth}
* [ ] > Percy was pissed. This was not the way the game was played. "Like the scorched landscape of hell. Shut down the diesels." She yelled to Chips through the comms tube. "Take us down to scope depth. We can't stay a heavy target on the surface with a maniac out there firing at us."
* [ ] The vibration of the diesel engine trailed away.
* [ ] > "Diesel is off, green lights across the board. Diving to scope depth"  The conn man spun a wheel here and there, and turned the bigger wheel, steel polished to a gleam from decades of use, that adjusted the down plane. His eyes locked on the depth gauge.
	* {this might be too naval}
* [ ] > "Now that the diesel is off, someone get on sonar" Said Percy. "I'll do it." {Donovan} volunteered. "No.. Sorry {Donovan} I need our best ears. Go wake up Cass."
		* {Not sure it's well established enough yet that Cass is good at sonar. Might be better to say that she needs {Donovan} at the controls.}

* {Percy puts the scope up and swings it around, scanning the horizon. She sees nothing.}
	* {remember distance limitations of how far you can see from the surface of the ocean}
	* {Also remember that mostly scopes aren't used on modern subs --- is it really useful for her to do this?}


### they dive again

* {Cass can hear the enemy sub out there. gives some details on it: maybe it's nuclear?}

* {they decide to dive again even with low batteries, start to employ some evasion tactics, running slow and deep}

* {running slow will make them late for their rendezvous with the _Gnat_, but they think they need to}


### rendezvous with the _Gnat_

* {they are scheduled to rendezvous with the _Gnat_ at depth --- via the mating collar}
	* {might be more fun to hold off the underwater mating until later, when they have to get Hemi aboard. maybe they rendezvous on the surface only here.} 
	* {but doing it here can be a way to explain the dull technicalities that it has to happen above the _Gnat's_ test depth. If you explain that here you don't have to slow down the action later when they are forced to come back up to get Hemi on board the _Gnat_.}
	* {Also it seems too dangerous to have them back on the surface with the chasing sub}

* {they worry the _Gnat_ might not be there, when they arrive, there is no sign of the _Gnat_}

* {with the engines shut down they wait silently, figuring this will help them evade any possible pursuers.}

* {they detect a boat on the surface, and worry for a bit, until they resolve it into something small --- must be the _Gnat_.}
	* {Or maybe it's that since Shakes knows about their pursuers, he ran the _Gnat_ noisily on the surface far away, and then dove and ran very slowly back to the rendezvous point.}
		* {this tactic needs to be used later, so maybe skip it now}

* {the _Gnat_ dives and mates with them.}


### Shakes on the deck

* {introduce Shakes in an in-character way, snorting stimulants or something.}

* {Shakes tells them the depot was attacked and taken by one of the authorities soon after the _Prospect_ left.}
* [ ] > some young go-getter officer from one of the authorities. seemed to be making a lot of noise over pretty small potatoes --- one shipment of weapons _parts_ not even whole weapons. Everyone at the depot felt like they were over-stepping the unwritten rules of undersea commerce. It was bad for business that this guy was so aggressive in the depot. he must be trying to impress upper level folks or something.}
* [ ] > thing is: he feels like since we're moving weapons parts, he has the right to shoot on sight.
* [ ] > "that's bullshit, most transport subs are legit and deserve at least a warning before they are fired on. he's going to get innocent people killed. not to mention us"
* [ ] {Is this where you drop some hints about how the Authorities have less control over the 3D medium of the undersea than the 2D surface? This could be saved for a later story}


### planning what to do

* {batteries are low on both the _Prospect_ and the _Gnat_. They need to run on the surface.}

* {they decide to send the _Gnat_ up to run on the surface noisily and fast. The _Prospect_ will follow, and run at full steam to try and get out of range while charging batteries.}


### on the surface
* {maybe this is when they come up in a blessed fog?}

* {they run on the surface through the darkness/fog keeping the _Prospect_ darkened; maybe engines at half-speed to keep the noise down}

* {the _Gnat_ runs hot and loud to attract the attention of anyone following. stacks blowing flame}
    * {this might be where you have Shakes make some cool adjustment to the diesels so they run _louder_, try to drown out the _Prospect's_ engine noise}

* {the _Gnat_ heads off in a different direction}

* {the _Prospect_ and the _Gnat_ keep in touch via ship-to-ship (CB-style) telephone}
	* {remember the distance restrictions on sonar telephone --- 1500 feet or so}


### the enemy surfaces

* {the _Gnat_ gets warning shots fired at it (tracer rounds or something)}

* {Shakes reports in to the _Prospect_ and then dives and goes into evasive maneuvers --- fast and loud, though running on electric}
* [ ] > "Sorry yos, I gotta make myself scarce now, or I won't be around much longer to help." 

* {Do we hear a transmission from the enemy? Or do they just shoot to kill? In some ways it might be more fun to keep them dark and silent --- like butch cassidy and the sundance kid}

* {the enemy chases the _Gnat_ for a way, but doesn't take the bait, and heads back on a path towards the _Prospect_}

* {Shakes warns the _Prospect_ they are coming back.}


### staring at dials
* {(See style experiments in sub world shuttle bay for draft experiments of generalized scenes of going deep, staring at dials, listening.)}

* {The prospect cruises sail-up to get the lookout up high. Nothing is seen.}
	* {Does it make sense for them to run sail-up if they have a snorkel? Not sure a snorkel-able sub would do that; though being a non-war sub it might be the thing they do} 
	* {see notes in sub specs about how you might want them to not have a snorkel for this first story; they get one after the upgrade}
* [ ] > The _Prospect_ cruised on the uncanny oil-slick surface of the ocean, partially submerged, with just the sail {fin} slicing through the glassy surface and leaving a low wake behind them to mark their passage across this curved globe. 
* [ ] > They left the sail above the waterline so they could get the lookout mast as high as possible. 
* [ ] > In the lookout ring Gregory clung, the hum of the diesels transmitted up the mast and crossed into the soles of his feet through the rusted metal grating he stood upon. 
* [ ] > With a pair of binoculars he scanned slowly around the horizon, but there was nothing to be seen but a flat circle of dark infinity, bisected with pure blackness on the lower half and almost-blackness on the upper half, like peeping into a viewport that looked into a frozen and unlit hell.

* {Percy is on the deck of the sail, the glow of the conn coming up from the open hatch at her feet.}
* [ ] > Five meters below Gregory, Percy stood on the deck of the sail dressed in a black waxed overcoat with the collar turned up. 
* [ ] > The unvarying resonance of her boat mixed with the unvarying ripple of the wake they left behind and left her feeling numb, though the night was not very cold. 
* [ ] > The hatch at her feet stood open, and a faint red glow rose up through the open hole from the con.

* {Dialog between percy and gregory; percy explains they want to run the diesels for as long as they can.}
* [ ] > "Anything Gregory?" She asked, more to break up the sensory deprivation than because she expected any kind of affirmative answer.
* [ ] > "No. If they are out there, they are dark as we are."
* [ ] > "And we're not going to hear them until we can turn off the diesels."
* [ ] > "How much longer, do you think, before we can submerge and go back on batteries?"
* [ ] > "The longer we can run the diesels the better, obviously. And while it would charge them much faster, we can't run them too hot and loud.  It's all a game of how much charge we can put on the battery before being found out on the surface here. We need at least a few hours at our current charge rate."

* {Shakes contacts them, tells them he tried to get them to chase, but they broke off the chase, were likely headed back to try to find the Prospect}
	* {It's possible they can't do this for range --- though they can use standard radio if they are both on the surface}
* [ ] > Through the open hatch they heard Shakes's voice coming statically over the mono speaker of the radio: "_Prospect_, _Prospect_, do you copy?"
* [ ] > "I've got you Shakes. Over." They heard Freddie's voice respond.  Shakes launched into his report.
* [ ] > "Yeah, you know, I managed to get those fuckers to chase me for an hour or so by running the _Gnat's_ engines hot and noisy, but they must have realized that I wasn't a transport sub because a few minutes ago they broke off and headed back in your direction. I assume to try to listen for you in a quieter place. Over."
* [ ] > "Hmm" Hemi said to himself. "Someone on their boat must have very good ears."

* {Percy takes over the convo with Shakes. Tells him to keep running away from the Prospect, they will set up a rendezvous.}
* [ ] > Percy came down the ladder and took the mic from Freddie.
* [ ] > "Shakes, this is Percy. I want you to keep running as you are. If they hear you continuing to move off, maybe they will doubt they made the right move by not following you. Over."
* [ ] > "That will give me a chance to charge up my batts too. Over."
* [ ] > "OK. I'll have Hemi figure out some reasonable rendezvous point and get back to you. Over out."

* {Percy and Hemi consult; they vocalize the expectation to be fired on again and how unreasonable that is}
* [ ] > Percy hung the mic back up on the radio mounted above her and eased into her captain's chair trying to think of what to do next.
* [ ] > "What do you think Hemi?"
* [ ] > Hemi took a hanging rag and wiped the lenses of his pince-nez before placing them on the bridge of his nose and leaning over to look at the row of dials that showed the engine RPMs and battery charge.
* [ ] > "It is, of course, a matter of the chance of them finding us on the open ocean versus our ability to get our batteries charged. If they _do_ find us, we will need all the charge we can get. I think we need to assume they will fire on us again, and we will likely not get the warnings and negotiations we usually get from Authority ships."
* [ ] > "Goddamn violent motherfuckers. Someone needs to tell them the wars are over."
* [ ] > "Are they really?" Freddie asked.
* [ ] > "Let's not get into that again." Said Percy tiredly. 

* {Percy decides they should start stopping and listening in between running the diesels to charge the batteries. Hemi says Chips won't like it, and heads off to tell her}
* [ ] "OK, lets start shutting the diesels down every half hour or so and do a careful listen.  Maybe we'll manage to hear them before they get into any kind of firing range."
* [ ] > "Hard on the engines all that stopping and starting. Chips isn't going to like it."
* [ ] > "Chips won't like getting hit with a torpedo either. We can't just run deaf for hours on end, it's too risky."
* [ ] > "I'll go have a chat with her." Freddie said, and lowered his huge body down the ladder to the deck below.

* {A mood-setting paragraph about the noise of the engines vibrating through the boat, hints at how charging the batteries works.}
* [ ] > Deep in the lower levels of the _Prospect_ the diesel engines fired their syncopated and timed explosions by the thousand every minute. 
* [ ] > The pulses blended together and spun the dynamos that generated the searing force of electricity that was partially dumped straight into the giant motors that spun the greasy drive shafts, and partially flowed into the heavy leaded chemical concoctions that would store power for later. 
* [ ] > This cycle of vibration drove through the whole boat, in a slow ruminating bass rhythm that in one instance might lull a person almost to sleep, and in another distract them totally from what they were doing. 
* [ ] > In many cases it was a consoling drone of progress and maybe profit. In this case it was a cutting drone of deaf and blind fear.


* {Percy orders the engines shut down for a listen.}
* [ ] > At 23 minutes after the hour, a randomly selected mark on the clock dial, Percy lit the comms light to the engine room. A minute later she heard Chips' voice echoing up the comms tube.
* [ ] > "Captain?"
* [ ] > "Shut down the diesels Chips. We're going to have a listen."
* [ ] > Chips didn't reply, but a minute later the loud throb of the diesels that hadn't let up for hours died slowly away replaced with the only the very soft hum of the electric motors still driving the boat along, like they had reached a bridge in some epic piece of experimental music.
* [ ] > "Disengage the electric drive motors too {Donovan}. We need to get as good a listen as possible. Someone wake up Cass and get her listening."
* [ ] > {Donovan} reached up and flipped a few large metal switches and the soft hum of the electric motors died away just as the noise of the diesels had.

* {Hemi goes off and brings Cass back to sonar. description of sonar station 
	* (might not be necessary if it was done during Hemi/Cass training session.}
* [ ] > Hemi slipped down the ladder and passed through the hatch at the rear of nav to go find Cass's rack in the crew quarters. 
* [ ] > Hemi returned in a matter of a minute or so to the nav room with Cass following sleepily behind him. 
* [ ] Cass looked up as she passed under to catch Percy's eye through the hatch down to nav.
* [ ] > "I'll have my headgear on in a second Pers."
* [ ] > Percy waited for Freddie to come up through the hatch and then slid down the ladder herself. 
* [ ] > Cass was already at the sonar station with one of the bakelite speakers of the headset pressed against her right ear, and the left speaker slightly off her ear so she could converse with Percy.
* [ ] > Cass was adjusting various knobs and switches, disengaging filters used when the engine was running and boosting the gain on the mics.  
* [ ] > Above the rows of knobs and switches was a set of rectangular meters with needles wavering along graduated backgrounds and along with a series of green, red, and amber lights showing the status of the various listening filters. 
* [ ] > Above those was a large round dial indicating which direction the underwater mics were oriented, and a large square meter indicating the strength of any signals the mics received.

----------------------------------------
----------------------------------------




* [ ] {enemy sights the _Prospect_ running slow and dark, and fires a non-warning shot hitting the deck}
	* [ ] > The speeding chunks of shrapnel, smacked against the hull, and echoed through the whole boat.

* [ ] {the _Prospect_ crash-dives and the real sea-chase begins. The _Prospect_ runs not too deep, trying to maintain some balance of speed and quiet.}
	* [ ] {consider note from rough narrative section with the suggestion that it might be dramatic if they keep getting detected and keep having to go deeper, until they are at the limits of their depths and batteries.}

* [ ] {the enemy fires a torpedo at the _Prospect_.}

* [ ] {torpedo incoming, homing with active sonar}

* [ ] {the _Prospect_ hard-crash deep dives, to get under the torpedo's max depth (how deep can torps go? --- let's say 200 meters; based on the ones at the end of WWII that maxed out at 400')

* [ ] {the torpedo implodes, the but the _Prospect_ is heading down with less-than full battery}

* [ ] {they slow the engines to a nearly silent crawl. they level off to figure out what to do --- the enemy decides to wait them out, guessing that they are low on battery}

* [ ] {they are pinged, and that gives away their location}

* [ ] Cass listens intently when they get pinged she snaps her headpones off but is left with ringing ears.

* [ ] {they dive again, percy explains that going deep the temperature changes of the water sometimes screws up sonar (maybe don't use the term thermocline)}

* [ ] {they go scarily staring-at-dials deep, and hide at depth}

* [ ] {Something goes wrong because of an order Percy gave? She gets them into trouble with her aggressive move? Hemi tries to stop her ("this isn't working Percy!"), but is overruled. Or should this be saved for a different story?}

* [ ] {maybe something breaks because its deeper than percys instinct tells her is ok}

* [ ] another ping -- johnson confirms the signal is strong enoug that they know where they are

* [ ] they know they need to figure out how to contact the gnat

* {(things to stash in story ideas for later:)} 
	* {below the deep scattering layer? bring that in here? or save for another story? --- final conclusion: save for another story}
	* {maybe close to the bottom, so they can't be seen on active sonar}
	* {maybe there is a loud noise on the _Prospect_ for some reason that alerts the enemy to where they are? Something louder than the electric motors?}
	* {avoid 'sonar', maybe say something like} 
		> the loud pinging of the homing device in the torpedo guidance system.
	* the _Gnat_ intervenes and guides the torp away; 
	* {the _Prospect_ releases some kind of counter-measure? shredded tin cans?}


### hiding deep

* [ ] {when it seems TOO deep they level off, with the boat's structural elements groaning.}
* [ ] panic dialog:
	* > "You've killed us!" Donovan said in a panic, realizing the hopelessness of their situation.
	* > "Stifle it Donovan! I'll figure something out." Said Percy
* [ ] {Maybe they DO pop a rivet? It gives away their position?}
* [ ] {then it's all silence, dampness, (dripping?) darkness, quiet, and fear.}
* [ ] {detailed description of Cass listening on the sonar: describe what she is hearing, her facial expression (big eyes closed), etc}
	* [ ] She closed her eyes, and her mind went out into the water. It was all blackness at first, but she relaxed, opened her mouth slightly to minimize the sound of her breathing. Her heart rate slowed. Her mind went out searching in the water. Without opening her eyes she turned the directional wheel, and she found her mind could follow the direction as if she were seeing out through the microphones. She didn't need to look at the directional indicator to know whether the mics were oriented to the front, sides or rear of the boat, she just _knew_. The pitch of the deep see fell away, and now it was all lit up around her. She could see the enemy sub behind them, the fish swimming around them, the sea floor, and she knew it was stippled with rocks. She could see the torpedo swimming at them quickly....
* [ ] {no idea what the _Gnat_ is up to. Do they try to radio Shakes?}


### the plan

* [ ] {they know they have to get out of this situation, they run the engines very slowly and try to move off}
* [ ] {Hemi comes up with the plan to use the magnetic mines}
	* [ ] {"the magnetic mines" "but how can we deliver them to the enemy sub?" "I have an idea. but I need to get aboard the _Gnat_."}
* [ ] {they realize they have to risk going shallow to mate with the _Gnat_}
* [ ] {Hemi goes off to work on his project.}
* [ ] {They send Cass down to help out chips, but Cass just fucks things up}
	* [ ] > "Fuck you doing?" Chips yelled?
	* [ ] > "I'm sorry!" Cass said.
	* [ ] > "God, that kid is fucking useless around tools. Said Percy."
	* [ ] > "yeah, but those ears..." Said Hemi.
* [ ] {the _Prospect_ gets the _Gnat_ on the radio, and makes an arrangement for an underwater rendezvous and mating.}


### mate with the _Gnat_

* [ ] {they fearfully and quietly come shallow, listening carefully for the enemy}
* [ ] {they get the _gnat connected, ok}
* [ ] {but as they are loading parts onto the _Gnat_ (no time to explain the plan to Shakes) the enemy comes into range. maybe fires again?}
* [ ] {Hemi jumps into the _Gnat_ and orders it off the mating collar (the _Prospect_ is a little unwieldy with the _Gnat_ on her deck)}


### in the _Gnat_

* [ ] {Hemi starts assembling his devices, (with slide-rule calculations of how much pressure each air bag needs to hold it steady in the water column) he explains the plan to Shakes as he does.}
* [ ] {the risky part is that the enemy is too smart to go after the _Gnat_ -- they know the _Gnat_ is there just to run interference, that's why they gave off chasing the _Gnat_ earlier and turned after the _Prospect_ -- so they have to use the _Prospect_ itself as the bait.}
* [ ] {Percy will run the _Prospect_ at 100 meters, full-engine like they are trying to get away.}
* [ ] {the enemy sub will run at the same depth, trying to line up an underwater torpedo shot.}
* [ ] {The _Gnat has to run _between_ them, and release their homemade magnetic mines. And hope Hemi got the calculations right.}


### In port

* [ ] {they arrive at their destination port and dock and unload}
* [ ] {Percy decides the mines are useful enough she buys a few crates from the traders}
* [ ] {some kind of minor twist to the ending? something dark? or comic?}


### {Alternate, more novel-like: they escape from the pursuers by some other means; get to port and drop off their cargo, but Hemi buys a crate of explosive mines; back in the empty sub cruising away feeling rich and safe, they have a cargo-deck bicycle race (see notes in shuttlebay); then they are picked up by the pursuing sub again, and are very bitter about it because they are empty now; and THEN they use the floating magnetic mine trick.}
	* {Consider also starting with something more dramatic: drop into action as Mickey Spillane advises (this not in notes and todos as well)}
	* {If you do this, don't forget to include details towards the beginning like Percy walking past a pile of rusty bicycles in the cargo bay the first time steps onto the _Prospect_}






