
\newpage

<div style="page-break-before:always;"></div>  
  
[//]: # (./two_preface.md)

[//]: # (This is _two_ underscore preface because it should come after the diagrams.)


## Preface 

You can skip this preface. Go ahead, I don't mind at all. Actually, I encourage you to. I'd much prefer you dove directly into the story than have you slog through this first 1500 words or so for no other reason than a sense of duty or a need to complete things. 'Entertainment first' is the rule here!

But if you are among those inclined to wring the most you possibly can from a book --- or if you've already _read_ this book and are back for a second pass to try to to wring a bit more out of it --- well then for you I've got this preface in here to maybe shed some light on a few of the more obscure themes of the book. If you do finish the preface, you may stand to gain an ever-so-slightly fuller experience when you hit the book itself. And hey, that's a kind of entertainment too.

The core theme of the book (and, OK, it's not actually obscure in any way) is an exploration of how humans live with their machines. Today we have more machines doing things for us than ever before, but the premise of this book is that there is something special about the human relationship to _mechanical_ machines. This book is about a particular type of human interaction with machines  --- the type that makes the human a "mechanic." Let me give you a simple example from the world of motorcycles.

Anyone who has ever had the pleasure of riding an old motorcycle is familiar with a device called the 'petcock.' The petcock is a valve that sits on the bottom of the fuel tank. When in the normal 'run' position, the petcock allows fuel to flow through it to the engine via a small pipe that sticks up a bit into the fuel tank. As the rider rides and the fuel burns, the amount of fuel in the tank eventually gets below the level of the top of that small pipe. The motorcycle coughs, sputters, and for all intents and purposes is out of gas --- even though there was still a pool of fuel sloshing around in the tank below the mouth of the little pipe. The sputtering motor makes it clear to the rider in no uncertain terms that they were running low on fuel. The rider then flips the petcock over and the valve turns to open a hole at the very bottom of the fuel tank, which allows the sloshing remains of the fuel to run to the engine. Thus the rider has reserve fuel left in the tank that lets them ride long enough to find a place to refuel.

The petcock depended on the idea that the surest way to know you are running out of gasoline is to actually run out of gas. It was mechanically super-simple and, any idiot who could manage riding a motorcycle could also manage the basic premise behind it even though it was conceptually more complex than a modern fuel gauge. And an idiot who was inclined to take it apart could see how it worked. In our time, that same need --- to know when you are running low on fuel --- is met by a sophisticated sensor mounted in the tank that feeds data to a black-box of a computer that calculates the remaining fuel and tells the rider when the fuel is running low by means of colored lights. The idiot riding the motorcycle needs to know less than ever about their bike to ride it. And the idiot is far less likely to be able to figure out how to fix it if something goes wrong.

In the latter part of the 19th Century and through most of the 20th Century, technology changed the world. But the technology of that time was different than ours. It was rooted in mechanical and electrical things. In that time, anyone who wanted to understand how a piece of amazing new technology worked could simply take it apart. Most things had an intuitive structure --- mechanical solutions based on logical processes. This is not the same as being _simple_. Many things from that era were in fact far more complex than today's equivalent devices. But learning how something worked --- and how to repair it --- only required a willingness to disassemble (and, following that, a whole lot of experience doing it). Most parts also had a macroscopic quality. They worked on a human scale. You could see the parts without magnification, you could place a part where it belonged with your fingers rather than any kind of special tool. Today, technology is changing the world again. But if you take apart a technical object today, all you will find is vanishingly small components that cannot be repaired, only replaced. And sometimes even the creators do not understand how they work.

Because of its mechanical underpinnings, that old technology also just _behaved_ more rationally. Even those who had not the faintest grasp of the fundamentals of how mechanics worked, would learn how their machine would behave just through the experience of using it. A good mechanic could tell by _feel_ that something was going wrong and could often guess what particular part was failing, rather than suffering randomness manifesting itself in the system. People could depend on their technology to behave intuitively when they used it, unlike our modern digital-based technology where even experts can be shocked by what it does and find themselves at a loss to explain why.

This old mechanical technology also came with an aesthetic. The mechanical nature of it made the stuff dirty, greasy, and grimy. It was powered by the air-fouling burning of things, kept lubricated by chemical greases, and cleaned with penetrating toxic solvents. This aesthetic permeated our culture. The rich found ways to constantly clean it. The poor and the technology maintainers simply lived in and among the grime.

Many stories from that mechanical age are often gripping because they told of average people achieving amazing things with the exciting new tools available to them. Often those average people made their extraordinary tools and technologies perform far beyond their original intended use. To this day there seems to be no end to the delight people take in stories of electro-mechanical machines. Indeed, we may yet still be more engaged with electro-mechanical stories than with stories derived from our modern technology: nearly everyone would rather follow the building of a custom motorcycle than the latest achievements from a microchip clean-room. It is even possible that the pleasures of mechanical things goes much deeper in the mammalian psyche than just human consciousness --- it has been shown that wild mice in a forest, given a wheel, will choose to spend their idle time running on that wheel.

The story told in this book is hung on technologies that anyone could understand with nothing more than a little armchair-pondering. The world this story lives in is confined to technology that is _non-magical_ and accessible. Mechanics become the medium for the story. More than that, I hope the reader who rides along with those who try to live among those machines can also _feel_ how the machines behave, what they can and cannot do. When this works, it sometimes becomes possible to leverage the reader's sense of how machines behave to a point where all the drama can be compacted into nothing more than the movements of a needle on a dial. 

Today's technology has crossed a line into the magical, and there is no way to put that technology back in the bottle even if we wanted to. But it is possible in the context of fiction to imagine a world where the electro-mechanical remained the dominant root of our everyday technology for far longer than it did. It is possible to imagine that, but for the geopolitical and economic winds blowing in a slightly different direction, the commerce and industry of our world could still be carried out by independent operators driving grease-coated machines steered by mechanical linkages, rather than corporations watching global satellite tracking on digital displays. In other words, it is my hope that in this story you might find similar pleasures to those of riding an old motorcycle.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------



