
[//]: # (./two_preface.md)

[//]: # (This is _two_ underscore preface because it should come after the diagrams.)


# Preface to the Director's Cut
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

You can skip this preface. Go ahead, I don't mind at all. Actually, I encourage you to. I'd much prefer you dove directly into the story than have you slog through this first 1500 words or so for no other reason than a sense of duty or a need to complete things. Entertainment first is the rule here!

However, if you are among those inclined to wring the most you possibly can from a book, or if you've already _read_ the book and are back to wring more out of it on a second pass, well then for you I've got this preface in here to maybe shed some light on a few of the more obscure themes of the book. If you are inclined to finish the preface, you may stand to gain an ever-so-slightly fuller experience when you hit the book itself. And hey, that's a kind of entertainment too.

Anyone who has ever had the pleasure of riding an old motorcycle has likely employed a device called the 'petcock.' The petcock was a valve that sat on the bottom of the fuel tank. When in its normal run position, the petcock allowed fuel to flow through it to the engine via a small pipe that stuck up a bit into the fuel tank. As the rider rode and the fuel burned down, there was no way the fuel level could fall below the height of that small pipe. When the fuel reached that point, the motorcycle would cough, sputter, and for all intents of purposes be out of gas --- even though there was still a pool of fuel sloshing around in the tank below the mouth of the little pipe. The sputtering motor made it clear to rider in no uncertain terms that they were running low on fuel. The rider would then flip the petcock over and the valve would turn to open a hole at the very bottom of the fuel tank and allow the sloshing remains of the fuel to run down to the engine. Thus the rider had the reserve fuel left in the tank that would let them ride long enough to find a place to refuel.

The petcock was a super-simple mechanical device premised on the idea that the surest way to know you are running out of gasoline is to actually run out of gas. Any idiot who could manage riding a motorcycle could also manage the basic premise behind it. And most idiots could take it apart and could see how it worked if they were so inclined. Today the same need --- to know when one is running low on fuel --- is met by a sophisticated sensor mounted in the tank, that feeds data to a black-box of a computer that calculates the remaining fuel and tells the rider when the fuel is running low by means of colored lights. The idiot riding the motorcycle needs to know less than ever about their bike to ride it. And the idiot is far less likely to be able to figure out how to fix it if something goes wrong.

In the latter part of the 19th Century and through most of the 20th Century, technology changed the world. But the technology of that time was different than ours. It was rooted in mechanical and electrical things. In that time, anyone who wanted to understand how a piece of amazing new technology worked could simply take it apart. Most things had an intuitive structure --- mechanical solutions based on logical processes. This is not the same as being _simple_. Many things from that era were in fact far more complex than today's equivalent devices. But learning how something worked --- and how to repair it --- only required a willingness to disassemble (and, following that, a whole lot of experience doing it). Most parts also had a macroscopic quality. They worked on a human scale. You could see the parts without magnification, you could place a part where it belonged with your fingers rather than any kind of special tool. Today, technology is changing the world again. But if you take apart a technical object today, all you will find is vanishingly small components that cannot be repaired, only replaced. And sometimes even the creators of it do not understand how it works.

Because of its mechanical underpinnings, that old technology also just _behaved_ more rationally. Even those who had not the faintest grasp of the fundamentals of how mechanics worked, would learn how their machine would behave just through the experience of using it. When something unexpected happened, it meant something was going wrong, not that randomness in the system was manifesting itself. People could depend on their technology to behave intuitively when they used it. Unlike our modern digital-based technology, where even experts can be shocked by how it behaves and find themselves at a loss to explain why.

This old mechanical technology also came with an aesthetic. The mechanical nature of it made the stuff dirty, greasy, and grimy. It was powered by the air-fouling burning of things, kept lubricated by chemical greases, and cleaned with penetrating toxic solvents. This aesthetic permeated our culture. The rich found ways to constantly clean it. The poor and the technology maintainers simply lived in and among it. They were nothing but punks in the grime, though they never would have referred to themselves that way.

It has often been commented that many of the stories from the great wars were compelling because they could be placed atop clear moral ground. But less remarked upon is that many stories from the wars were so gripping because they told stories of average people achieving amazing things with the exciting new tools available to them. Often those average people made their extraordinary tools and technologies perform far beyond their original intended use. To this day there seems to be no end to the delight people take in stories from the electro-mechanical age of machines. Indeed, we may yet still be more engaged with electro-mechanical stories than with stories derived from our modern technology: nearly everyone would rather follow the building of a custom motorcycle than the latest achievements from a microchip clean-room. It is even possible that the pleasures of mechanical things goes much deeper in the mammalian psyche than just human consciousness --- it has been shown that wild mice in a forest, given a wheel, will choose to spend their idle time running on that wheel.

The story told here is held in place by technologies that anyone could understand with nothing more than a little armchair-pondering. The world this story lives in is confined to technology that is _non-magical_ and accessible. Using the mechanics as a medium, I hope, an amazing story emerges. More than that I hope the reader who rides along with those who try to live and among those machines can _feel_ how the machines behave, what they can and cannot do. It sometimes becomes possible for a story to leverage the understanding of how machines work to a point where all the drama can be compacted into nothing more than the movements of a needle on a dial.

We now live in a world where technology has crossed a line into the magical, and there is no way to put that technology back in the bottle even if we wanted to. But it is possible in the context of fiction to imagine a world where the electro-mechanical remained the dominant root of our everyday technology for far longer than it did. It is possible to imagine that but for the geopolitical and economic winds blowing in a slightly different direction, the commerce and industry of our world could still be carried out by independent operators driving grease-coated machines steered by mechanical linkages, rather than corporations watching global satellite tracking on digital displays. It is my hope that any reader might find in this story similar pleasures to those of riding an old motorcycle.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


